README.md, before:

# RAG-IMAGE-QA

A Streamlit-based application for extracting structured information from bill/invoice images and enabling question-answering over the extracted data using Google Generative AI (Gemini) via LangChain.

---

## Table of Contents

- [Project Overview](#project-overview)
- [Features](#features)
- [Directory Structure](#directory-structure)
- [Setup Instructions](#setup-instructions)
- [How It Works](#how-it-works)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Data Schema](#data-schema)
- [Customization](#customization)
- [Notes](#notes)
- [License](#license)

---

## Project Overview

RAG-IMAGE-QA allows users to upload bill/invoice images, extract structured data from them using OCR and LLMs, and ask questions about the extracted data. It supports both default and user-uploaded images, storing results in JSON for efficient retrieval and QA.

---

## Features

- **Image Upload & Parsing:** Upload multiple bill images or use default samples.
- **OCR & LLM Extraction:** Uses Tesseract OCR and Google Gemini (via LangChain) to extract and structure bill data.
- **Question Answering:** Ask natural language questions about the extracted bill data.
- **Streamlit UI:** Simple, interactive web interface.
- **JSON Storage:** Extracted data is stored in JSON for easy access and further processing.
- **Robust Image Validation:** Uses PIL to validate images before processing, ensuring only valid images are parsed.

---

## Directory Structure

```
rag-image-qa/
│
├── app/
│   ├── main.py           # Streamlit app entry point
│   ├── billParser.py     # Image parsing and data extraction logic
│   ├── jsonStore.py      # JSON storage and QA logic
│   ├── models.py         # LLM model initialization
│   └── __pycache__/
│
├── data/
│   ├── default/
│   │   ├── Images/       # Default bill images
│   │   └── images_data.json
│   └── browse/
│       ├── Images/       # User-uploaded images
│       └── images_data.json
│
├── test.py               # Script for testing extraction and parsing
├── Notes.txt             # Project notes and ideas
├── requirements.txt      # Python dependencies
└── README.md             # (You are here)
```

---

## Setup Instructions

### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone <repo-url>
cd rag-image-qa
```

### 2. Install Dependencies

Install all dependencies using the provided `requirements.txt`:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

> **Note:** You also need Tesseract OCR installed on your system.  
> On Ubuntu: `sudo apt-get install tesseract-ocr`

### 3. Environment Variables

Create a `.env` file **one directory above** the project root (as the code loads `../.env`).  
Add your Google Generative AI API key and any other required secrets:

```
GOOGLE_API_KEY=your_google_api_key_here
```

---

## How It Works

1. **Image Selection:**  
   - Use default images or upload your own via the Streamlit UI.

2. **Text Extraction:**  
   - Images are processed with Tesseract OCR to extract raw text. Only valid images (checked using PIL) are processed.

3. **Data Structuring:**  
   - The extracted text is passed to a Google Gemini LLM (via LangChain) with a prompt to convert it into a structured JSON schema.

4. **Storage:**  
   - The structured data is saved in `data/default/images_data.json` or `data/browse/images_data.json` depending on the mode.

5. **Question Answering:**  
   - Users can ask questions about the bills (e.g., "What is the total bill amount?").
   - The LLM is prompted with the question and the JSON data, and returns an answer based only on the provided data.

---

## Usage

### Run the Streamlit App

```bash
streamlit run app/main.py
```

- Toggle between default and uploaded images.
- Upload images (`.png`, `.jpg`, `.jpeg`) as needed.
- Ask questions in the provided text box.
- View answers generated by the LLM.

---

## Data Schema

Each bill is parsed into the following schema:

```json
{
  "image_name": {
    "invoice_number": "string",
    "order_id": "string",
    "order_date": "string",
    "invoice_date": "string",
    "seller": "string",
    "buyer": "string",
    "billing_address": "string",
    "items": [
      {
        "name": "string",
        "quantity": "int",
        "unit_price": "float",
        "tax_percent": "float",
        "total_price": "float"
      }
    ],
    "subtotal": "float",
    "tax_percent": "float",
    "total": "float",
    "payment_method": "string"
  }
}
```

---

## Customization

- **Use your own Images:** You can upload multiple images from the UI. **Note:** Uploaded images via the UI are processed for the current session only and are not stored for reuse.
- **Add More Images:** Place them in `data/default/Images/` to make them available as default images.
- **Change LLM Model:** Edit `app/models.py` to use a different model or parameters.
- **Extend Schema:** Modify the schema in `app/billParser.py` and `app/jsonStore.py` as needed.

---

## Notes

- The app uses multi-threading for faster OCR on multiple images.
- All price units are assumed to be in USD.
- If a question cannot be answered from the data, the app will respond with "No information in the provided Images."
- For development/testing, see `test.py` for standalone extraction and parsing examples.

---

## License

[MIT](https://github.com/yash-meshram/rag-image-qa/tree/main?tab=MIT-1-ov-file)

Commit message:

Enhance usage instructions in README for Streamlit app UI

README.md, after:

# RAG-IMAGE-QA

A Streamlit-based application for extracting structured information from bill/invoice images and enabling question-answering over the extracted data using Google Generative AI (Gemini) via LangChain.

---

## Table of Contents

- [Project Overview](#project-overview)
- [Features](#features)
- [Directory Structure](#directory-structure)
- [Setup Instructions](#setup-instructions)
- [How It Works](#how-it-works)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Data Schema](#data-schema)
- [Customization](#customization)
- [Notes](#notes)
- [License](#license)

---

## Project Overview

RAG-IMAGE-QA allows users to upload bill/invoice images, extract structured data from them using OCR and LLMs, and ask questions about the extracted data. It supports both default and user-uploaded images, storing results in JSON for efficient retrieval and QA.

---

## Features

- **Image Upload & Parsing:** Upload multiple bill images or use default samples.
- **OCR & LLM Extraction:** Uses Tesseract OCR and Google Gemini (via LangChain) to extract and structure bill data.
- **Question Answering:** Ask natural language questions about the extracted bill data.
- **Streamlit UI:** Simple, interactive web interface.
- **JSON Storage:** Extracted data is stored in JSON for easy access and further processing.
- **Robust Image Validation:** Uses PIL to validate images before processing, ensuring only valid images are parsed.

---

## Directory Structure

```
rag-image-qa/
│
├── app/
│   ├── main.py           # Streamlit app entry point
│   ├── billParser.py     # Image parsing and data extraction logic
│   ├── jsonStore.py      # JSON storage and QA logic
│   ├── models.py         # LLM model initialization
│   └── __pycache__/
│
├── data/
│   ├── default/
│   │   ├── Images/       # Default bill images
│   │   └── images_data.json
│   └── browse/
│       ├── Images/       # User-uploaded images
│       └── images_data.json
│
├── test.py               # Script for testing extraction and parsing
├── Notes.txt             # Project notes and ideas
├── requirements.txt      # Python dependencies
└── README.md             # (You are here)
```

---

## Setup Instructions

### 1. Clone the Repository

```bash
git clone <repo-url>
cd rag-image-qa
```

### 2. Install Dependencies

Install all dependencies using the provided `requirements.txt`:

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

> **Note:** You also need Tesseract OCR installed on your system.  
> On Ubuntu: `sudo apt-get install tesseract-ocr`

### 3. Environment Variables

Create a `.env` file **one directory above** the project root (as the code loads `../.env`).  
Add your Google Generative AI API key and any other required secrets:

```
GOOGLE_API_KEY=your_google_api_key_here
```

---

## How It Works

1. **Image Selection:**  
   - Use default images or upload your own via the Streamlit UI.

2. **Text Extraction:**  
   - Images are processed with Tesseract OCR to extract raw text. Only valid images (checked using PIL) are processed.

3. **Data Structuring:**  
   - The extracted text is passed to a Google Gemini LLM (via LangChain) with a prompt to convert it into a structured JSON schema.

4. **Storage:**  
   - The structured data is saved in `data/default/images_data.json` or `data/browse/images_data.json` depending on the mode.

5. **Question Answering:**  
   - Users can ask questions about the bills (e.g., "What is the total bill amount?").
   - The LLM is prompted with the question and the JSON data, and returns an answer based only on the provided data.

---

## Usage

### Run the Streamlit App

```bash
streamlit run app/main.py
```

### How to Use the UI

1. **Launch the App:**
   - Open your browser to the local Streamlit URL (usually shown in the terminal, e.g., http://localhost:8501).

2. **Choose Image Source:**
   - At the top, use the **"Use default images"** toggle:
     - **On:** The app will use the sample bill images provided in `data/default/Images/`.
     - **Off:** You can upload your own bill images for analysis.

3. **Uploading Images (if not using default):**
   - Click the file uploader to select one or more `.png`, `.jpg`, or `.jpeg` images from your computer.
   - The app will automatically process and extract data from the uploaded images.

4. **Ask a Question:**
   - Enter your question in the text input box (e.g., "What is the total bill amount?").
   - Click the **Submit** button.

5. **View the Answer:**
   - The answer generated by the LLM will be displayed below the input box.
   - If the answer cannot be determined from the data, you will see: "No information in the provided Images."

6. **Reload Default Images (if using default):**
   - Click the **Reload Default images!** button to reprocess the default images if needed.

---

## Data Schema

Each bill is parsed into the following schema:

```json
{
  "image_name": {
    "invoice_number": "string",
    "order_id": "string",
    "order_date": "string",
    "invoice_date": "string",
    "seller": "string",
    "buyer": "string",
    "billing_address": "string",
    "items": [
      {
        "name": "string",
        "quantity": "int",
        "unit_price": "float",
        "tax_percent": "float",
        "total_price": "float"
      }
    ],
    "subtotal": "float",
    "tax_percent": "float",
    "total": "float",
    "payment_method": "string"
  }
}
```

---

## Customization

- **Use your own Images:** You can upload multiple images from the UI. **Note:** Uploaded images via the UI are processed for the current session only and are not stored for reuse.
- **Add More Images:** Place them in `data/default/Images/` to make them available as default images.
- **Change LLM Model:** Edit `app/models.py` to use a different model or parameters.
- **Extend Schema:** Modify the schema in `app/billParser.py` and `app/jsonStore.py` as needed.

---

## Notes

- The app uses multi-threading for faster OCR on multiple images.
- All price units are assumed to be in USD.
- If a question cannot be answered from the data, the app will respond with "No information in the provided Images."
- For development/testing, see `test.py` for standalone extraction and parsing examples.

---

## License

[MIT](https://github.com/yash-meshram/rag-image-qa/tree/main?tab=MIT-1-ov-file)
